[Everyday C#] PR 10 — Strings: overview, raw strings, nameof (#53676)
dotnet/docs: docs/csharp/fundamentals/strings/index.md

ms.date: 05/08/2026
ms.topic: overview
ai-usage: ai-assisted
---

# C# strings

> [!TIP]
> This article is part of the **Fundamentals** section for developers who already know at least one programming language and are learning C#. If you're new to programming, start with the [Get started](../../tour-of-csharp/tutorials/index.md) tutorials first.
>
> **Coming from Java or C++?** A C# `string` is an immutable reference type backed by <xref:System.String?>. UTF-16 is the in-memory encoding, similar to Java's `String`. Unlike C/C++, strings aren't null-terminated and don't decay into pointers.

A *string* is a sequence of characters. In C#, `string` is the language keyword for the <xref:System.String?displayProperty=fullName> type. Every string literal you write produces a `System.String` instance.

## `string` vs. `String`

The `string` keyword and the `String` type name refer to the same type. They compile to identical intermediate language (IL).

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/strings-overview/Program.cs" ID="StringKeyword":::

> Prefer the `string` keyword in your own code. It's consistent with the other built-in type keywords (`int`, `bool`, `double`), and it works without a `using System;` directive. Reserve `String` for places where you need to call static members and want the type name visible (for example, `String.IsNullOrEmpty(value)` reads slightly more clearly than `string.IsNullOrEmpty(value)` to some teams — both compile identically).

Reviewer: Is this your guidance or Copilots? VS always prompts me to use the keyword even for static methods.

Author: Not sure how that one snuck in. I'll remove it.

## Strings are immutable

*Immutable* means the value can't be changed after it's created. Once you create a `string`, you can't change its characters. Methods such as `ToUpperInvariant`, `Replace`, `Substring`, and `Trim` return a *new* string that contains the modified value. The original instance stays the same.

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/strings-overview/Program.cs" ID="Immutability":::

> Because strings are immutable, you can safely share them across methods and threads. This immutability explains why the `string` type behaves like a value in everyday use even though it's a reference type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because strings are immutable, you can safely share them across methods and threads. This immutability explains why the `string` type behaves like a value type in everyday use even though it's a reference type.
```

> When you build a string from many small pieces in a loop, each `+` or `Concat` call creates a new instance. When you build a string from several components, use <xref:System.Text.StringBuilder>, which appends in place and produces a single string at the end:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you build a string from many small pieces in a loop, each `+` or `Concat` call creates a new instance. A better choice is to use <xref:System.Text.StringBuilder>, which appends in place and produces a single string at the end:
```

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/strings-overview/Program.cs" ID="StringBuilder":::

> For a small fixed number of pieces, plain interpolation or `string.Concat` is clearer and just as fast.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a small, fixed number of pieces, plain interpolation or `string.Concat` is clearer and just as fast.
```

## String literals

C# offers four literal forms. Each form suits different content. As a quick guide:

- Use **regular literals** for short, simple text with at most a few escape sequences.
- Use **verbatim literals** when backslashes dominate the content, such as Windows paths or regex patterns.
- Use **raw string literals** for multiline or structurally formatted text, such as inline JSON, SQL, XML, or formatted message blocks.

> - Add a ` prefix to any of the above literals to get an **interpolated string** when you need to embed values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add a `$` prefix to any of the aforementioned literals to get an **interpolated string** when you need to embed values.
```

For any literal that contains quotes, backslashes, or multiple lines, prefer **raw string literals**. They eliminate escape noise entirely, which makes them the best fit for inline JSON, SQL, XML, regex patterns, and formatted text blocks where the source should look like the output:

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/strings-overview/Program.cs" ID="Raw":::

Raw string literals all but eliminate escape sequences and accommodate any formatting and quoting you need. See [Raw string literals](raw-string-literals.md) for the full rules.

### Interpolated strings

A `$` prefix turns a literal into an *interpolated string*. Expressions in `{}` holes are evaluated and their results inserted, and you can apply standard format specifiers and alignment inside the holes. Interpolation also combines with the other literal forms — use `$@"..."` to interpolate a verbatim literal, or `$"""..."""` to interpolate a raw string literal for richly formatted output:

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/strings-overview/Program.cs" ID="Interpolated":::

Interpolation is the recommended way to compose strings from values in everyday code.

## UTF-8 string literals

> A `u8` suffix produces a <xref:System.ReadOnlySpan%601> of UTF-8 bytes instead of a `string`. UTF-8 literals are useful for HTTP, network protocols, file formats, and other byte-oriented APIs that don't need a UTF-16 `string` at all:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `u8` suffix produces a <xref:System.ReadOnlySpan`1> of UTF-8 bytes instead of a `string`. UTF-8 literals are useful for HTTP, network protocols, file formats, and other byte-oriented APIs that don't need a UTF-16 `string` at all:
```

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/strings-overview/Program.cs" ID="Utf8Literal":::

The bytes are emitted at compile time, so there's no runtime encoding cost.

## Indexing and `char`

A `string` is a sequence of UTF-16 *code units*. The indexer returns one <xref:System.Char?displayProperty=fullName>, which represents a single UTF-16 code unit, not necessarily a complete Unicode code point. `Length` returns the count of code units.

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/strings-overview/Program.cs" ID="Indexing":::

For text that might contain emoji or characters outside the Basic Multilingual Plane, iterate by *rune* using <xref:System.Text.Rune> or by grapheme cluster using <xref:System.Globalization.StringInfo>. Plain `char` iteration works for most Western text and ASCII-dominant content.

## String equality

Equality on `string` compares the character sequences, not references:

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/strings-overview/Program.cs" ID="EqualityIntro":::

> For comparisons that need to be locale- or case-aware, pass an explicit <xref:System.StringComparison> value. Use `StringComparison.Ordinal` for protocol values, identifiers, and other non-linguistic text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For comparisons that need to be locale-aware or case-aware, pass an explicit <xref:System.StringComparison> value. Use `StringComparison.Ordinal` for protocol values, identifiers, and other non-linguistic text.
```
